good morning and welcome to debugging an
Xcode what we'll cover this morning
first we'll have a bit of a tour of
debugging services in Xcode and then
we'll talk about how to use custom data
for matters a little bit of how you
write the various formatters has anyone
here actually customized any of the data
for matters other than people that work
at Apple well hopefully we'll increase
that number after today is talk then
we're going to talk about guard malloc
and how you use that with Xcode and then
we'll cover fix continued enhancements
that are new in Xcode 1.5 and 2.0 in
fact everything we're going to talk
about today is in Xcode 1.5 and 2.0 and
then we're going to do a little remote
debugging we'll talk about the setup and
show you what you can do with it and of
course we have lots of demos for you so
getting started the debugging service is
an Xcode we have of course a graphical
UI that graphical UI is shared by the
Java debugger and our C code debugger
that's C code debugger C based code
debugger is gdb so when you're debugging
your C code it acts as a GUI interface
to GEB
of course it has thread picker you can
be your stack variables and also we have
an expressions window you can also set
and remove breakpoints right in your
code right in the gutter there you can
click on your breakpoint it'll remove it
it's that one if there isn't one there
already you can control click and get a
little menu item so you can disable it
if you want and of course you can
control your program execution there are
tool bar items for stepping starting
restarting and of course their menu
items which you can find your own key
shortcuts do and of course it lets you
access the cool features like fixing
continue and remote debugging
now our support for non sea-based
languages include AppleScript and java
which are not the topic of this talk so
let's do a little tour now go to the
demo machine and we'll show you what we
have
so first go up and up sketch it's
launching a little slowly because we're
booted off of one of those tiny firewire
hard drives so one of the first things
you'll probably want to do is to edit
your executable in the executable
inspector you can change the arguments
that you're going to be passing to your
executable so and also your environment
variables so you can create sets of
these and then toggle them on and off as
you like however if you get too many
it's a little difficult to manage large
sets of them so you might want to go
ahead and create a new executable item
in your project and then you can have
named it appropriately and then do bug
it that way so let's start up the
debugger here will click the debug
button
and we had our first breakpoint won't
disable that here in the breaks point
panel and continue
so here's sketch running and we'll open
up a document I've made before and go
back in able our break point and now
when I interact with the program we see
that we hit the breakpoint in the
debugger and up here above the stack and
the column header is a little pop-up and
it says thread one if there's more than
one thread then the pop up will be
active and you'll get you can switch
between the other threads and then the
stack will update the variables will
update and your source will update to
reflect that so you'll notice that some
of these stack frames are grayed out and
some are bold if they're bold that means
we have symbols for them so that we can
show you source lines and your variables
that are in them if they're grayed out
we don't have symbols but we'll go ahead
and show you the disassembly down where
the source view is so let's go back to
the top of the stack
and if you want to view the decembe li
with your source go up here to the debug
menu and you can toggle the disassembly
display now in the seed you're going to
need to click on the stack frame that
you're looking at and then it'll update
the PC pointer over in the disassembly
view but here we have your source code
and your dissembling in the same view
and if we go up to the toolbar and we do
step over instruction you'll see that
the PC and the decembe lis is changing
as we go through the code but those
lines that we're stepping through are
all on the same line of source if you do
a step over you'll see that we've
stepped over in the source view and then
the PC and the disassembly is also
updated now if you'll notice in the
variable view we have variable graphics
here
it's an NS array and it's just been set
as you can see from the source code
where a breakpoint is whenever value
changes between stepping will highlight
it in red for you so it's easier to see
if we step again you'll see the eyes
changed and highlighted in red so now we
can actually go and edit the value of I
and we can set it to 4 and just to prove
to you that it's set to 4 for those of
you that don't like the gdb console you
can avert your eyes now we can open the
console for an eye and sure enough it's
been set to 4 as you would expect
but as you can see that's not going to
be a good idea because we're going to
iterate through our for loop there and
we'd probably cause an exception as we
access the array so we can drag the PC
back and then execute that line of code
again just another way we could have
gone and edited that value and set it to
three again but it's a useful technique
to be able to move the PC if you've
accidentally gone past Hawaiian of code
that you want to step into say there's a
function you wanted to step into and
you've gone past it you can simply drag
the PC back and then click step into
so with graphics we see that it's in NS
array and it's telling us that there are
three objects but there isn't much more
information there so what we can do is
using the contextual menu we can print
the description to the console the
console automatically comes up for us
and if we scroll up to the top where it
displays the variable we see that NS
arrays have a description where they'll
give us the count and then tell us what
the values are and then it'll go through
each element of the array and do
description on those and we see that the
elements inside the array each have a
very verbose description giving us the
bounds the class in this case it's a
circle and some other attributes now I
like my gdb prompt to be a little bold
so we can go to the debugger preferences
and we can set the font size and we can
change it to bold and click apply
so you can go through and you can
customize your standard in standard out
you can have different fonts if you want
different colors even and as you can see
over here in the source code view I've
actually changed the instruction pointer
highlighting to a light green you may
have been seeing red and all the other
demos
one other important item to keep in mind
is that we have key bindings so if you
don't like the the default key bindings
for the various debugger functions the
stepping that sort of thing you can
define your own now let's go back to
slides so as I click hmm one word so and
you also see that when we're running in
the debugger and if you were to quit
Xcode we say nope we're running this
also works for the run panel that's been
much requested and that's fixed in Xcode
1.5 in 2.0 so let's go back to slides
now custom data for matters we
introduced them a year ago and how many
of you know when you're looking at a
custom data format or in the variable
view of course the Apple guys so
basically they'll let's you summarize
the information so you don't have to
turn down the variable for instance
structures can get quite long you can
summarize exactly what you want to see
it saves a vertical space which is very
precious on a lot of screens and you can
add your own custom text to the data
values let's go back
and you can also evaluate expressions
you can make calls to functions as part
of your simple expression data for
matters and you can also create custom
plugins which can be more complex
now custom data for matters they're
bound to a type so if you change the
variable formatter
for one change the formatter for one
variable it's going to change the
formatter for all variables of that type
just something to keep in mind we have
about 35 carbon formatters for instance
OS error FS ref and some structures and
we have a bunch of about 35 foundation
for matters as well for instance you saw
NS array we tell you the count of
objects in this dictionary we tell you
the number of keys we have for matters
for Anna's point and us rect some of the
app kit structures now your user
customizations are all stored in your
home directory tillable library
application support apple developer
tools custom data views custom data view
stop you list so if you have a great set
that you want to share with other people
you can give it to them they can paste
they can then insert it in the same
place in their home directory and then
they'll have the same data for matters
that you have
and for plugin support you should look
at the data format or plugin h file
which is actually inside the Xcode app
app wrapper you have to search down
inside that probably with terminal or
you can use open package contents and
finder
now summary formatters their lower
overhead than the other four matters
they're basically percolating values
that we've already fetched or are easy
to fetch into the summary the recursive
so if you have one formatter for one
structure that has another structure
that also has a formatter then that
formatter can be used as well and you
don't have to drill all the way down
into those children the basic format of
a summary formatter is a child path
surrounded in percent signs colon and
then a referenced column now the child
path is a dot delimited path to the
child data value a lot like you would
reference a structure in C and C++ child
paths can leave out private protected in
public you don't have to reference those
we'll skip those automatically for you
now the reference columns all refer to
the columns in the variable view for
instance there's the name variable
column there's the value column the type
and the summary column so this is going
to reference which of those columns of
the variable you want to display in your
summary and we'll cover that in a little
more detail so here's an example where
we have an NS Point has two elements an
x and a y and you might write a format
it looks a little bit like this so you
might have x equals percent X percent
and y equals which is some custom text
you can put anything there and then % y
percent and it might look something like
that
in the variable display
I'm a similar thing for Ananas size
where you reference the width and the
height surrounded by percent signs and
some custom text before or after it and
that would display something like this
as we talked about before they're
recursive so if you have an NS rect
which has an Origin which has an NS
point and then a size as two elements of
that structure you can simply reference
those elements and their data for
matters will be used so you might have
custom text parentheses surrounding a
reference to the origin as well as the
size and then it would look something
like this in the variable display now
expression for matters are a bit more
complex they're higher overhead because
you're actually asking gdb to go execute
some code or do some logic for you
usually you're executing a function and
it can't have side effects since you're
actually evaluating something in gdb so
if your variable formatter had something
like I plus plus in it then I will
increment and if I have some variable in
the stack it'll have changed so be
careful what you do you might also be
able to do something interesting with
that and you should always cast your
expression formatter to the correct type
gdb can be a little unhappy if it
doesn't know the type for the return
value of the expression here you're
calling so it's always safest to cast
the proper type if you don't enter the
type and the formatter doesn't work
cast as the proper type and try again
and avoid taking locks avoid anything
that will take a lock avoid anything
that might need a lock is just not a
good idea to do that in your expressions
now expression formatter will look
something like this you'll have your
expression surrounded by curly braces
and then again we have that colon
referenced column the dollar sign bar is
used to reference your variable in the
expression that you write
now you want to think you can think of
your expression for matter is though it
we're variable of the type that you've
cast it to in the variable display so if
it's a char star char stars happen to
show up always in the summary column so
you get to an example of that in a
minute
so for an NS array if you've ever gone
and double clicked on the summary column
of an NS array you might have seen the
format it looks sort of like this so we
have some custom text we have curly
braces surrounding our expression dollar
sign bars replaced by the actual
variable when it's passed to gdb for
evaluation so we get back an integer
which we're casting to be safe and we're
casting were or including : V at the end
just to be pedantic it's the default if
you don't include any reference column
then that's the default
so just for correctness now you could do
this type of formatter for a pool if you
were tired of seeing ones and zeros for
all your bowls you wanted to see true
and false because that's what you're
used to programming it has or you might
want to see this yes and no if you're in
cocoa so here again we have our custom
expression and we're casting it to a
char star and because we're casting it
to a char star we need to reference the
summary column so for an STL string for
a standard template library string if
you're you have a simple null-terminated
string you can use the formatter like
this to be able to view that string in
the summary column so here we're simply
calling have some custom text C string
equals curly brace casting are expressed
into a char star dollar sign bar dot c
ng score STR function call close it up
and end it with : s
now for custom data format or plugins
you can do more complex things basically
allows you to do a custom print for a
debugger on types that you may not have
access to or somebody's giving you a
framework and they don't have custom
debugger printing it's automatically
used so once you create one of these
bundles in it is a Appy list that
specifies which type it's for and Xcode
will automatically use that data for
matter for that type and this code runs
in your program so you want to be
careful what you're doing if you're not
comfortable with allocating memory or
being carefully just not over running
the buffers that you're creating then
you might want to be careful with these
be sure to handle invalid input often
times these variable formatters will be
called before your variables have been
initialized so you want to be safe with
what you're doing now in order to create
a custom data format or plugin you need
to start with a new project
we'll have a demo of this so you don't
need to write it all down then you need
to add a bundle target to it for
instance a cocoa bundle and then you'll
need to add a Heather search path in
this case you can see that it crawls
down into Xcode application app bundle
itself that's where the data format or
plugin dot H lives this way we can
simply reference pound include data
format or plug-in H in our code and then
you also need to add a custom data
format or views dot P list this is the P
list I was talking about that specifies
which type this custom data for matter
is for and also what summary string to
use so here we see dictionary with a key
which is bool and that's the type that
this formatter will be used for and then
summary string is the next key and
that's the summary string that will be
used in the summary column so in this
case we're cut we're calling my bulla
description dollar sign bar
going to be replaced with the actual
variable dollar sign ID is used by Xcode
to help the plug-in custom data views
manage the allocation of memory so that
we have because we don't know how long
it's going to take for Xcode to go and
fetch that data we can't use a single
buffer for that so we need to keep track
of that so that's something that'll be
passed to a custom print function that
we supply that you can use in your
custom plugins here's some example code
up top we see that we have a pointer to
our PBX gdb plug-in functions those are
the plugin functions that we support for
you and we declare our function which is
my bullet descriptor and we have our
type which is bool and int for the
identifier for that memory call now if
you look at the code we see that if a
bool is yes then we're going to
construct this print function which is
going to cons up the message for us
allocate some memory and take care of
managing that for us so we can return
any string we want
now we have Jim Ingham on to give us a
demo of custom data for matters this one
okay so we're gonna go over these kind
of an order of dangerousness from not
very dangerous to very dangerous open
these
so the ones that are the % ones that's
really doing nothing that's just taking
information that's already fetched on
your behalf and and using it so I'll
show you those that those you know you
can play around with those for free
they're really it's really nice you can
go in and you know as you're looking at
something you know change it for a
little while change it back they're
really easy once you get the syntax is
straight forwards just like your C
syntax and kind of once you get into the
habit of just oh I want to see these two
fields now oh I want to see these two
fields now it really becomes an
interactive thing that you can go and
and do as you're going along it's it's
really a nice workflow I think okay so
let me find somewhere interesting that I
want to be
tt
okay
so we got sketch again that's what we're
using as our example all the time this
year okay so I'm here somewhere so I
have this bounds which is got custom
data for matters already you can see if
you want to see what the custom data for
matter is for anything remember you just
double-click on it and it'll show you
what the current data for matter is but
maybe my what I like is to keep my value
column fairly small because I have you
know a lot of strings or something like
that in the summary field I want to make
that big so we chose to put this
particular set of custom data for
matters in the value column and that's
annoying to me I don't want to do that
so I want to move it over to the summary
comb so that's that's what I'll show you
how to do first so that's pretty
straightforward let me actually do it
for the constituent elements first so
bounds has you know a point in a and a
size so let's take this one and you can
just copy it from here and double click
and put it over there so now it's gonna
show up over there so that's all you
have to do it you know once you get used
to this is something that's mine right
you can really change in a nice way all
the stuff that you view so I put this
one over here right then now I've got
redundant information so well maybe
there's something else I'm interested in
here like since it's a structure or
maybe I want to see what the address of
the structure is so that one would be
pretty straightforward to do too that's
going to be an expression because we
didn't fetch the address of the
structure in a way that you can get at
it so but you just write an ordinary C
expression surrounded by the curly
brackets that's our little syntax which
says this is an expression with send a
gdb and I'm just getting you know the
address of that array for some reason
it's not updating right away but it'll
update in a second don't worry and then
maybe I'll do the same thing here
because well I don't know but because I
said so in the demo script
okay so I've got that but then notice
over here so this is the the deal with
the columns that's a little bit
confusing at first but it's actually
pretty straightforward
you know I changed the value contents of
the origin structure that was contained
within this bound structure so then all
of a sudden what started showing up as
the summary for origin in the bounds
structure that contained origin is that
address that I wrote in and the reason
for that is because the summary here
that I'm getting is coming from the
value column by default because I
haven't put a colon which column am i
referencing in the origin right which is
this one that I'm pulling the format or
out from so if I want this to come now
from the summary column because again
I've moved the information I'm
interested in from the value column to
the origin column then I have to say
that's from the summary column and the
same thing here I have to say that's
from the summary column so now that
shows the contents from the summary
column and which is the one I want it
for the outer summary so again can move
this over here and I don't know you know
I could take this one and put it over
here just to make everything look pretty
so okay so that's the two things one you
know double click to find them that's
how you discover them the notion of you
know when you have a substructure like
this origin substructure you can use it
in the parent just by referring to it
and again the column says in the sub
structure that I'm pulling values out
from which column am i referencing like
am i referencing the stuff that's here
or am i referencing the stuff that's
here in the formatter up here okay so
that's pretty straightforward
[Music]
okay cool
so now I don't want to stop here anymore
yeah
hey what do you want to select Aptos oh
I see now I have source yay
okay so the next thing I want to stop at
is like I want to be in SKT e
okay
[Music]
here
you okay so here's another place like my
document is a type that's mine and you
know it's the one in sketch that
contains the circles and squares and so
on and so forth so I actually might want
to see some useful pieces of information
about it like in this case maybe what I
want to see is how many circles do I
have and how many squares do I have that
might actually be a useful piece of
information so it turns out that what
the document contains is actually NS
arrays and it contains an NS array of
circles and contains an NS array of
squares and then it has an access or
method called rectangles to get the NS
array so there's no way that I'm gonna
find out those numbers by you know
grubbing around instructors cuz NS array
is hide from me where the number of
elements is and my little accessors are
such that you know I'm hidden where the
NS array for rectangles is so I'm gonna
have to call some code to do that but
it's pretty straightforward access or
code so it's really not too much worry
it's unlikely that I'm gonna crash my
program you know calling for circles or
squares or change its state by getting
the number or something like that so
that's the kind of function call that
you can call in to the inferior that's
actually pretty safe it's it's not gonna
do any harm on the other hand me trying
to type while you're watching me do
infinite harm so I'm not gonna do that
I'm just gonna you it's not gonna let me
copy are you gonna watch me type okay
that's gonna be fun so for instance
maybe I just want the number of circles
here just to limit the your fun so you
know I have to call to get the number
that I'm gonna get the number of get the
array and then get the number of
elements in the array so the number of
elements in the array is gonna be an int
and here's my variable so dollar var
that's the the thing that I'm
referencing the document and I'm gonna
have to get the circles out of that oh I
have to get a curly brace on the outside
yep so you really don't want me to type
here and then now I've got the circle so
that's great note I cast the
yeah the outermost thing this one is
going to come back as an in that's fine
and then that so that's the circles
that's an nsarray really but it's fine
to call it Enid and I'll count on that
yeah I probably do this is one of those
you just keep typing until it works okay
so yay that shows me circles and if you
wanted to watch me type and that
horribleness then I do the other one but
I'm not going to
I don't amuse myself that much so then
the other example that
oh yeah that's okay one of the thing to
notice by the way so here in graphics
the what we have is kind of this little
grayed out version of the varial
formatter but we don't have anything and
the point for that is what Chris said
namely that graphics is actually not
initialized yet right graphics gets
initialized in the next line of code
that we're going to execute so but this
is actually calling again a function
it's calling count and something like
that so in most cases you know gdb is
actually probably what happened was that
Xcode went and asked you to be to call
this function and you know var contains
some junk some you know whatever was on
the stack at that point and that
probably crashed because you know
calling selector on some junk generally
crashes but jeebies pretty good at
cleaning up that sort of crash so as
long as what goes on in the functions
you call in the for matters don't change
state it doesn't really matter too much
if they actually don't go terribly well
when you call them sometimes because gdb
just wipes up the stack ago so I didn't
see that and everything's fine
so you don't have to worry too much what
you have to worry about is stuff that
might change State or stuff that might
acquire resources because like if you
have a multi-threaded program these are
going to be running another thread might
have the resource okay
and that's the sort of thing that'll go
badly but just like a little minor crash
that really won't won't affect too much
so okay
we want to stop somewhere else I'll show
you the bool example that that we showed
before just so that you can see that it
actually does work and that you're
really calling you know any expression
that's valid in your current language is
what you're calling
I want to be in you
okay so let's go back here and run
okay so here we're somewhere that has a
pool and oh that looks really really
ugly so let's let's make that look a
little nicer so again we're gonna write
an expression it's coming back as a char
star and what we want is you know if the
variable is one we're gonna return yes
or yeah
if it's positive we're gonna return yes
and otherwise we're gonna return no so
the only funky thing about this is that
we had to put back slashes before the
quotes and the reason for that is that
this is has to be passed down to gdb and
gdb has a command line which has certain
syntax and one of the things is the
quotes delimit arguments so if we past
unprotected quotes then when that got
down to GDB GDB would think that those
were argument delimiters and the line
wouldn't parse and they get all ticked
off so anytime that you're passing a
quote down just backslash it that's the
only one that you have to worry about
and again it's one of those you need to
just keep typing it until it works kind
of things
that's why aren't you working hello all
my typing just went away what did that
happen Kris so dollar var maybe I know
that's running
[Music]
oh yeah you're right
I'll get it yeah yeah at that one isn't
Titan on stage fun yeah well I typed
something wrong I'm not gonna try to
type it right on stage because I can't
type but anyway that would show up the
other one I wanted to show you just to
just to make the point and this one I
can type is pretty straightforward just
to make the point that you you know you
really are playing with power tools here
is that you could do something like this
okay that's a nice little expression and
then you know three four five okay so
you really are changing the state of
your program so so you want to be
careful about that okay so then the last
thing that we want to do is show you how
to do the plugins where you build your
own custom plug-in and so as I say you
know from the percent ones which are
just information we've already fetched
so there's no way you can screw it up to
the curly braket ones which you're
calling functions and it's getting a
little more dangerous to the ones where
you're actually injecting your own code
into whatever program that you happen to
run under the debugger where you know
you're getting really dangerous but on
the other hand if there's stuff that you
can't get from the external level
calling functions or something like that
or if there's kind of a formatting that
you need to do which it is time
consuming or you know just a drubbing
around and some more stuff than you want
it right here I mean these can be
valuable for instance the carbon stuff
was done that way because you know you
wanna like go and look through a window
and pick out the ten things in the
window list that are really interesting
to you and format them up in some nice
way I mean that's actually would be
tedious to write in as an expression the
summary of you you probably could write
some really long thing that did it but
you'd surely get it wrong writing it as
the plug-in is easier so for that we
have to go and make a new project so
it's easiest just to make an empty one
and I will call it and put it on the
desktop so I can find it okay so what I
want to make the the depending on you
want to make a bundle because it's
something that's gonna be loadable into
your program but if for instance you're
gonna be doing a another carbon data
format or you'll want to make a carbon
bundle cuz that it'll set it up so the
link to carbon correctly and have all
the stuff you need if you want to view
some you know app kit types then you
want to make a cocoa bundle what
whatever you whatever the point of the
of the formatter is so we're just gonna
make it a cocoa one a cocoa loadable
bundle and we'll call it okay so one of
the things that we have to do as Chris
said is we have to go and set in the
header search path to point into this
horrible location which I nicely put on
this thing but anyway so you get to
watch me type again
that's roughly right we'll just find it
out when it doesn't compile okay so you
have to add that search path because
that's where we stored this the the data
plug in dot H file and then what you
need is the P list file and you need the
C file that actually implements your
code so because I couldn't possibly type
those here I have them already made
okay
you wake up a little firewire drive okay
so here's the plist no that's this one
yeah same thing that Chris showed you no
work we could actually within a given
plugin define for matters for a whole
bunch of different types in this case
we're only defining one for one type and
then here's the the name of the function
that we're defining so we're just in the
same way you would do any variable
format or what's happening is that this
code gets inserted into the target
program it provides a bunch of functions
and then you use the normal variable
syntax to call out those functions the
one thing to be careful about of course
is remember that you're gonna be
inserting this into whatever code you
happen to run in the debugger so you
probably want to be a little careful
about choosing some gnarly name you know
like my bull description is probably not
a good choice you know xx xx underscore
some numbers and what I don't know but
anyway choose something that you're not
going to collide with other symbols and
then the little ID token which is how we
manage memory and resources for each
instance of the running data formatter
and then here's the actual code so again
we provide some plugin functions in this
case basically the ones that are useful
are there's a sort of a printf but it
printf to somewhere that we can find it
and and there's a there's well this is
just a print a string and then there's a
there's an actual printf which takes all
the printf arguments that you can use if
you want to do more fancy printing and
then there's one that help you handle
memory allocation if you need to
allocate memory because it's nice to let
us do it rather than that rather than
just cook on your own so we're not using
those two we're just using the simple
message which just prints a message it's
good to check for this thing that's
gonna be set by the the data format or
code that Xcode always runs in the
target program but maybe that didn't
work for some reason or you deleted it
and forgot or something like that and if
this code ends up showing up that's not
going to be defined and your crasher
program and we probably won't recover at
that point and then we're just
taking the variable that's passed in so
we you know we we we were passing in
dollar var which was gonna be some bool
so it's a bool when we check and print
true or whatever print false so it's
pretty straightforward so you can build
that DDD yeah we're AB kit okay
wonderful okay so then you have to find
your build products which in our case
are here
here and move this into the proper place
for where plugins go so where that is is
in your home directory library
application support apple developer
tools custom data views so that's where
the things should go this is by the way
we're also the custom data plist that
stores the ones that you've typed in
like the percent ones and the VAR ones
they're all actually stored in here so
if you want to see what you've got or if
you want to get rid of them all at once
for some reason go into this same
location just delete that file so that
there okay well anyway that was the
finder and I think you have to quit
Xcode to get it to reread these it
looked like it you didn't one time but
it's a demo so I'm not going to try that
so let me open the to one side here
and go again
I didn't open the other project
opened oh look at that so there's not
the desktop
so what's going on here is just the
breakpoint that I wanted to stop at was
said in a framework not in the main app
so you have to actually have the
framework open for it to know that
they're bringing there so let's see I
put something there so it was overriding
the default one again anything you type
in at the console is gonna override any
built-in ones but then when I deleted it
it switched back to the default one
which was calling my function and that
printed false so pretty easy to do ok
let's go back to slide I'll go back to
slides now so thank you Jim now we have
some new ways to display data in Xcode
1.5 and 2.0 we now display file statics
right in the variable display so if
there any file statics thank you there
any file statics will display the file
statics turn down if there are no file
statics and it won't be there or if we
can't detect any of the symbols so it's
just like the arguments and the locals
if there are no arguments or locals and
those turndowns
don't show up in the variable display so
we also have the global variables
browser which was shown on Monday lets
you browse global variables by library
you simply go into the debug menu the
tools and bring up the global variables
browser inside that browser you can then
search and filter on the various fields
multiple selection doesn't work yet
we're working on that and then you can
click in the view column for the items
they actually want to view in the
variable display so it's a good way of
filtering down from possibly hundreds or
thousands of global variables that could
be in your programs space down to just
the ones you're interested in we also
have the memory Brown simple memory
browser and you can either type in
addresses you can type in variables you
can also type in some expressions which
Jim will probably show us so let's get
Jim back up here for file statics and
global memory let's have this one again
okay so in this case you know of course
we're a nice object-oriented application
so of course we have no Global's and
almost no statics so actually
constructing the demo is a little bit
hard because there really wasn't much
interesting but in any case I can find
some place so let's see find the same
place that I was before
okay so we'll run
you know well we stopped there instead
that's okay so if you want to see well
this one doesn't have any statics but if
you want to see Global's again there's
nothing here right now but we can make
there be something to go to tools'
global variables so there's going to be
the list of all the stuff that's here
the by Global's we mean global variables
that have debug information because if
it doesn't have debug information we
don't know how to print it for you and
so we're just not going to list it it
turns out that app kit has a whole bunch
of them and you can do evil things that
you shouldn't do so I didn't actually
show you that the the one thing other
thing that that can be kind of confusing
is sketch actually has a whole bunch of
modules and we're building this with
zero link so the way that zero link
works is that each of the dot o files
each of the modules in your program
comes in as a separate bundle and they
come in on demand that's the wonderful
thing about zero link is you don't load
everything right startup but you load it
onto manage you need it but it means
that in the global variables view stuff
is not going to show up until it's
actually shown up in your program
because before it is been loaded we
don't know anything about it we don't
know where it's gonna live you know so
so for instance here you know I would
expect lots of SKT stuff and I actually
don't have much but any case of what I
have you know here's something so the
way that you decide that this is
something you're gonna view is you just
click check that you're gonna view it
and then you can close the browser and
then it will show up under here so
that's how you selectively view global
variables without being overwhelmed by
the you know huge number like there were
500 in app kit you just you didn't want
to see those 500 so this is a nice
interface for showing you that just to
convince you that the zero link thing
works the way that I said let's take
that away ok so now I can go up and go
back to sketch and I can turn on say the
grid and I can you know I don't know
change the spacing or whatever and then
if I go back here and pause and now view
the global variables again so now some
grid stuff is shown up
so this is what's gonna happen so if you
want to view Global's your before you
can discover them the first time you're
gonna actually have to make that code
show up in your program and then you'll
be able to poke around and set it to be
shown so that's that yeah and then
statics just show up under statics this
is a I can hit the other breakpoint and
then I can find statics for you like so
this one actually has some some statics
they're just listed under the file
static so these are the ones that are
defined statics to the file and they'll
just show up all automatically you don't
need to pick them or anything like that
that's that and then the third new thing
that I was gonna show was that we now
have a little memory browser so a memory
browser it'll view memory at whatever
address so for instance like dollar r3
here you could type in addresses you can
type in you know any expression dollar
are three normally stores the the object
but yeah I don't know probably an object
I can't really tell the other thing you
can do is you know if you have accessors
which are pulling out stuff and you want
to see the stuff at the access or like
for instance you know we pull out the
document here by this self draw a
document so we could just say self draw
a document and it's going to resolve it
to whatever the address is and then
printed that it doesn't stay live it
resolves it to the address and then it
prints the address so if you wanted you
know to track a location as it changed
you'd need to reenter the expression
every time the other thing is you know
you can change how much you want to
display you know bigger or smaller this
is a little stepper so you can step
through pages of memory based on the
size that you have that's pretty much
that okay all right let's go back to
slides please
so new in the debug menu we've had to
reorganize it a little bit we have some
more menu items for you and we wanted to
still be able to fit on a 10 by 7 screen
so as we had before
we still have stopped on C++ catch and
throw you can control the decembe lis
display they're actually three modes
there whenever in the default mode if
you click on a stack frame with source
will just show the source and then you
can do the mixed view as we showed you
earlier the third mode is that will show
you only the disassembly whenever you
are clicked on the frame that has
symbols so if you want to stay in
assembly mode or you don't want to split
your screen then you can choose that
mode and then you choose the mode a
fourth time you dissin choose that menu
item a fourth time and then that would
get you back to the original mode and
that's specified by a check mark and
then a dash next to the menu item to
show you what state you're in
now you can enable and disable the data
for matters either using the contextual
menu in the variable view or in the
debug menu under we have the same
contextual menu that shows up in the
variable view in the debug menu and you
can select it there now if you're in the
middle of debugging your program and you
disabled the data for matters you can
re-enable them later if they're disabled
when your program starts then won't have
loaded our introspection library and you
only get the summary for matters
whenever you enable the data for matters
again just something to keep in mind we
also have stopped on debug string call
and debugger call right in the debug
menu so you don't have to go to the
executable inspector and switch it on
there it is still available there and we
track the two and keep them in sync and
now you can enable Guard Malik right in
the debug menu all these settings are
now stored per executable some of those
settings used to be stored per session
of Xcode so if you had two projects open
and you enabled break on stop on c++
throw then it would be enabled for all
of your programs
so let's talk about guard Malik a little
bit what is it basically causes your
program to crash and that's a feature
what's detecting is it's detecting
memory access exceptions beyond your
allocated buffers it can also detect
access of freed buffers and this is all
done because at runtime we insert a
debug version of the Malik library at
runtime as your load as your program is
loading up in the debugger and then it
uses the VM system to add guard pages
around your memory allocations now it
also overwrites freed memory so that you
can with bit pattern so you can detect
when you've read that memory in a little
bit of an assistant there however your
codes going to run a little bit slower
because it's doing extra memory
allocations in order to put guard pages
around the allocations you've done in
fact it pushes your allocations so that
they end right at the end of a page so
there maybe there's could be potentially
more memory being allocated than what
you've asked for
however it's still thread safe which is
good because a lot of applications
you're writing today have other threads
getting launched for them either via app
kit or carbon so how do you use garden
malloc well it's best to use it with the
debugger because it's going to cause
your program to crash on these memory
access exceptions so then that'll give
you the back-trace that you can then go
use to find out what the problem is as
we said earlier you enable it in the
debug menu and this is essentially
causing us to environment variables the
first is D while D insert libraries and
then we specified the Liberty malloc
library and that will cause Lib do
malloc library to be inserted at runtime
the second is force flat namespaces if
your program will not run with flat
namespaces then you won't be able to use
card malloc again the debug is normal
exercise your program and then we'll bus
error throw up an exception we'll catch
it on your bad memory access
and then you can just follow the stack
right to the problem so Garden Malik has
a lot more options you can put guards
against buffer underruns you can allow
allocations over 100 megabytes and you
can check for do extra checking before
free and reality all you can also fill
allocations with bit patterns so you can
tell which memory you've filled up and
you've allocated and then you can detect
if you've read it by accident and there
more options in the Lib G Malik man page
these options are all environment
variables which you can then go set
using the executable inspector and set
the environment variables like I showed
you in the first demo and now let's get
Jim back up here real quick before
Garden Malik demo so again this one so
I'm not gonna show you anything
particularly interesting just to show
you that it works and how you turn it on
and stuff you know this is the classic
mistake I made a buffer to hold a string
but I forgot to allocate the space for
the null right and then I wrote some
stuff into it and and overrode it so if
you do this and and you just run it then
I mean it just runs fine it nothing
happened right there was no mistake but
there actually was a mistake which as
your program got more and more
complicated you would eventually come
across so what's better is to run under
guard malloc when you're worried about I
have some weird behavior or maybe it
happened upstream I don't know where but
I can catch it
and again that's easy to do that's just
a menu pick enable guard malloc if you
want some of the fancy options you need
to go into the executables tab and set
environment variables as Chris said but
we're not going to need to do that here
all we need to do is just debug it so we
get a bad access right when we did the
store copy which is what you expect
because we went one character past the
end of the buffer we allocated to write
the null which we hadn't allocated and
it just gets us right away so that weird
zero which ended up showing up in some
other data structure somewhere you can't
figure out why you figure
why immediately so that's what garden
malloc is for let's go back to slides go
back to thanks Jim
so with VIX continue which you're into
which we introduced a year ago allows
you to change your code while you're
debugging your application you can make
the changes while you're running the
application and you can't in you can
continue your debug application to
continue your debug session without
having to do a recompile in real ink so
it allows for more of a prototype style
development it's extremely useful for
those long debugging sessions whenever
you're have a bunch of program States
set up and you want to do some simple
changes try and fix your program however
requires that you use native targets
which is the default for most new
targets that you create in Xcode and of
course it requires GCC 3.3 now new and
xcode 1.5 and 2.0 we have support for
fixing and supporting projects so if
your application is in one project and
you have supporting frameworks and other
projects you can now fix the code in
those frameworks while you're debugging
your application this requires that all
of your projects need to be built with
debugging symbols enabled so probably
just the development build style fix
continue needs to be enabled and if
you're using C++ you need to enable zero
link as well now all these projects need
to be open the next code at the same
time so we can go find which target has
the file that you're trying to fix so
what can you fix you can change logic
you can add new calls you can delete
code you can change constants and some
other constant some other common
operations things that won't work you
can't change the size of structures or
class layouts or function signatures can
add global and static data and if you
happen to be trying to fix the frame
that's at the top of the stack
you can't add local data and if you do
make changes that require initialization
then you need to be after you do the fix
you need to make sure to move the PC
back to execute the line of code to
initialize your data
let's get Jason up here for our fix
continued thanks Christopher
so can we get the demo machine up please
thank you we're gonna be looking at the
sketch project again because it's our
favorite project of all we Christopher
is splitted into two parts of framework
and an application so that we can show
the support for the supporting projects
and fix the continue that's new in this
release unfortunately it's not actually
working in the tiger seed but we're
gonna have it fixed by the end so just
bear with us for now but it's going to
be in the final tiger so here on the you
see on the screen we have the framework
project right here and we have the
application project both of them built
already so we're gonna launch them in
the debugger and the little hard drive
spins here we go
so the basic thing we get a circle it's
filled with blue probably not what we
actually intended so this is a great
chance to use fix and continue to change
the behavior of the program without
having to restart it and relink it and
recompile and all that other stuff that
you have to do normally so the thing
that we're gonna fix is over in the
framework so over here we're looking for
SKT rectangle which has the rectangle
class here it is and we have the setup
function right here so let's set a
breakpoint there and let's draw another
circle swear rectangle here we have a
chance to change the color that's using
for the fill right now it's setting blue
let's change that to red because maybe
that's what we actually intended because
red rectangles are what everybody needs
more of now we're gonna say save it and
fix
compiles the file link succeed and fixed
now if I continued at this point as you
can see the PC has already passed the
point where it sets the color so even
though we fixed it the colors already
been set we need to move the PC back a
couple of lines so it's going to set it
to the new color if we drew another
rectangle after this and we get the new
color but we want it on this rectangle
so let's drag the PC back up to where
it's setting red color and then continue
from there
unfortunately draw a really small
rectangle it's just disable that
breakpoint for a second there would be a
red rectangle if it worked now we have
red it's fixed and continued just like
you've always seen it but you'll notice
that the application which we're
debugging is separate in a separate
project from the framework or fix it
continuing so the supporting project is
the really exciting new thing here one
caveat that's important to understand is
that a file can belong to multiple
targets so what you have to do if you
have a pic if you're fixing continuing a
file that's in multiple targets as a
supporting project you're gonna have to
give Xcode a little hint as to which
target it is you're fixing so for
instance let's do this again over in the
framework let's duplicate the target so
we have two targets with all the same
files in them duplicate it and we'll
just call a separate name so that it's
clear now we have two frameworks with
the same file in it
again we're gonna well we won't stop at
the breakpoint we can fix and continue
without getting to the breakpoint in
fact it has fewer limitations fixed
continue when you stopped in the middle
of function has a number of limitations
on changing that particular function so
instead let's just run in the main event
loop and do the fix from there so
instead of red color
I think green color would be a much
better color save it now when we try to
fix it which we'll do from the debugger
so there okay
fix now we get this pop-up and this
pop-up is telling us is asking us which
target it is we're trying to fix so that
it knows how to process it and get it
back into the executable so we tell it
that is sketchy framework build
succeeded it's fixed now we get the
green one one really nice feature is
that once you've told it which target is
it's going to cache that and remember it
in the project so now if you do a
different color we fix it again it
remembered that we're working with
scratch sketch framework so you'll only
have to actually do the selection once
and from then on it's just the default
and we get a brown one so that's the new
fix of continuous supporting projects
Thank You Christopher Thanks
in the back slides so now whether it be
across your cubicle or maybe just down
the hall we bring you remote debugging
this is great for debugging those full
screen applications games screen savers
in fact some games if we know have had
bugs in full screen mode only and so the
only way they've been able to debug
these is to go to the terminal on
another machine SSH in and fire up gdb
so they don't have the advantage of the
graph above the bugger it's also great
for debugging event handling so you're
trying to drag the mouse and you want a
debug at the same time now what happens
normally is Xcode is going to have to
come up if you've hit a breakpoint and
now you aren't going to be able to move
the mouse anymore in your program so
with remote debugging you can now
continue to use the mouse as you debug
your application and it supports nearly
all the xcode all Bex codes features and
your seed doesn't support fix continue
but should be pretty easy to fix for now
one thing you won't be able to do is you
won't be able to send standard into your
remote process so you won't be using
this to debug your command line
applications remotely on another machine
there's a little bit of setup for remote
debugging you need two machines of
course and remote login SSH SSH login
needs to be enabled on the remote
machine now I need to share the build
products especially if you've built with
zero link that's because these are links
looking for the other datos that it's
created at a specific path so if you're
using a network home directory that's
quite easy all both machines will have
access to the build products with the
same path if you use an AFP to share
from one machine to the other then you
might have to use symbolic links in
order to fix up the path so that it's
the same access on both machines
note that finder aliases won't work
currently so you'll need to use symbolic
links to enable remote debugging you
bring up the executable inspector you
check the debug executable remotely with
SSH and then you fill in the host text
field with the username on the remote
machine that you're going to log in as
and either an IP address or a host name
I need to make sure that the user that
you're logged in as is the same user
that's logged in at that machine
otherwise you won't have permission to
write to the Windows server and your
graphical application will not watch so
we're using ssh public key
authentication this means that you need
to set up your public and private keys
on the remote machine xcode is SSH asian
to wear so you can encrypt your private
key and it's not a big hassle to and
your passphrase once and then you don't
need to enter it again until you quit
Xcode or reboot the machine there's some
documentation on how to set all of this
up because we don't expect you to pick
it up the first time and run through it
vector not going to run through the
whole setup here and that documentation
is called remote debugging with Xcode
and that's a connect apple.com reference
library and tools now let's bring up gem
for a quick demo of remote debugging
quick because we're running out of time
so let's let's start over here
so we have one already set up let me
just open up the application and the
framework that goes along with it so
this machine is another g5 this is the
one we're working on here and we just
want to debug
I'm gonna sit okay so the first thing
you have to see is this is the the
sketch tab that's the main project and I
need to make sure that the current
executable is set up for remote
debugging that's what I have to do on
the on the host machine side so there's
that nice little edit active executable
you can get up to here you know look in
the debugging tab so you check this
checkbox debug executable remotely via
SSH you have to type in the host and
username and and IP address of the host
and that's all I have to get that right
you had to set up the SSH I'm not going
to show you that because that would
involve typing and you saw how that
worked last time so we're not going to
do that okay but then once that set up
then it's just a matter of debugging so
it's gonna ask me for my SSH password
because I don't have an SSH agent
running and I don't have any of the
freeware that does ssh and passes it
down to applications or shareware but
it'll only ask me once
once i've typed it in if i bugged again
it wouldn't ask me again because it sets
up an ssh agent itself and then uses
that agent for the rest of the session a
little bit can you switch to this
machine for just one second
so just to prove to you that it is here
it's running it's running under the
debugger you can you know do whatever
sit and that's interesting okay hit
breakpoints over here so let's go back
to this this one for a second so see I I
hit some nice breakpoint now I'm here I
can step around or whatever the one
thing that we saw here was you know what
I wanted to do was I was stroking out a
rectangle and and and I wanted to
actually get away from you know watch
the mouse events as I was stroking out
the rectangle over here but one of the
things that's kind of inconvenient is
you know okay so I click down and and
then it was great I stopped immediately
at the mouse up event here which is what
you see the event is is Mouse down mouse
down event rather but now you know this
mouse I've got to like you know put a
sock full of rice on the mouse to hold
the mouse button down and then slowly
move it and then take the sock off for
the mouse button up or whatever there's
actually some one thing that's really
neat that you can use in the universal
access stuff which can make this kind of
event level remote debugging which is
that's where remote debugging if you're
full-screen games and then for regular
applications just like you know I have a
tracking loop and I wanted to bug
through a tracking loop you know how do
I do that
then there's one thing that I want to
show you that will make that more
convenient so let's go back over here
continuous I'm not here anymore okay so
what you can do is if you go to
universal access in System Preferences
and turn on the mouse keys feature the
universal access in the mouse mouse keys
so turn that on and then what that does
is that makes the keys into the mouse
movement but one of the really cool
things is that it has separate keys for
the mouse down not mouse click but just
mouse down that's the zero key and then
the five key is the mouse up and then
the arrow keys of the movement keys so
if we switch back over to this machine
we didn't ever go here okay so I hit
Mouse down here and see I broke in the
mouse down and then if I continue
and then I can click and get the mouse
move and you know continue and keep
getting the mouse move and I can go and
I can you know have both hands and I
don't have to worry about putting
another mouse button and then eventually
you know when I get to the point where I
want to make the rectangle I have to
continue of course and I can finally
click the five and that's when I get the
mouse up so that's that that'll you know
free your hands and you don't have to
get your child to come and hold the
mouse down or whatever the one other
thing that's that's here by the way the
this was not one that we added I mean
the event is an NS event and as we were
going along it was really convenient I
wanted to see what type of nth I was
getting because I was you know making
events over here and then looking at
them over here so again we just added a
custom data format or it turns out that
under the event one of the member
elements is is the underscore type that
has the the type of the event and I was
annoyed at having to turn that out so I
just put it up there so that's just
again the data format it's a really
close like I want to see that now
okay that's good
[Applause]
thanks Jim so now we need to finish
things up so we can take some of your
questions really quick this is the
reference library there's remote
debugging and Xcode which talked about
earlier there's a document on fix
continued
there's debugging with gdb which is more
in-depth gdb command line commands and
of course we have Xcode help which is
built right into the application it's a
great resource to go look at encourage
you to do that
and now who to contact
Matthew Formica
you